1. Introduction

Peers on the network are tracking state (modeled as ledgers) and state
transitions (modeled as "transaction sets"). Consensus is the process that
allows the peers to track to the same state over time, applying the same
set of transactions.

Ripple's implementation allows partial network splits, aka partitions:

    * In some events, a set of peers can be consistent with each other but
      not consistent with the overall network, causing a "fork" in history
      (much in the same way you can fork code in a branch).

    * At some point, this faulty group can "snap back" into place by
      pointing to the majority branch; currently there is no attempt in
      doing a "merge" of the bad branch, it's simply abandoned.


2. General organization

2.1 High level flow

The local instance tries to reach consensus with nodes proposing from the UNL.
The UNL is populated through the combination of
  * explicit entries in the stellard config file,
  * a "validator list" configuration file
  * a "validation url" to reach a server that serves UNL entries

Consensus is tracked by a "LedgerConsensus" object.

There are two ways to initiate the creation of this object:
    * A timer that triggers every LEDGER_GRANULARITY (1 second)
    * Event triggered when receiving certain things off the network
        * TX Map
        * Trusted proposals

Once a LedgerConsensus object is created, its state is regularly
refreshed/advanced by NetworkOPsImp::m_heartbeatTimer calling
LedgerConsensus::timerEntry() every LEDGER_GRANULARITY seconds.

LedgerConsensus::timerEntry's duty is to:

    * Check that the local instance is on the proper ledger compared to
      other peers on the network (using validations for the most part), and
      trigger downloading of Last Closed Ledger (LCL) if necessary.

    * Compute the time elapsed in the current state (stored in
      mCurrentMSeconds) as well as mClosePercent, that represents
      the ratio between mCurrentMSeconds and mPreviousMSeconds.

    * Call the handler for each state.

During consensus, positions are filtered to only be the ones that
match the local instance's "last closed ledger". In other words,
a fork only "sees" peers that are participating to the fork.
Switching ledger is done by the checkLCL method that runs during
all states preceding (and including) lcsETABLISH. A ledger is
considered the network ledger if it has the most validations, peers
or the highest peer ID (evaluated in this order).

Note that the current implementation tries to limit as much as possible
forks by not closing ledgers that are not on the network ledger.
This causes peers not on the network ledger to be sweeped by the
"checkLCL" code until they run on the network ledger.

!!!!! Open: it seems that the peerID is used as a tie breaker between
validators, giving unfair advantage to some validators when
tie breaking is important, such as deciding to switch over to a new
fork.

2.2 parameters influencing consensus

The config option "consensus_threshold" controls how many peers must participate in the
consensus round.
If the value is positive, it represents a percentage of the UNL.
If the value is negative, it represents directly (in absolute) the number of peers.

Target proposers (mTargetProposers) is then simply computed as the number of peers
that must participate in consensus plus one (for the local instance).

3. Consensus states

The consensus object moves between the following states

3.1 lcsPRE_CLOSE

This is the state the consensus starts in.

It's a buffer state where peers wait for each other, most likely
downloading the "current ledger" from the network if not on it already.

Note that peers are not perfectly synced to each other, therefore relying
purely on timing is not practical and instead peers have to rely on other
signals that inform them on the overall state of the network.

3.1.1 Conditions for moving forward from lcsPRE_CLOSE, to establishing
consensus


To move out of the lcsPRE_CLOSE state, the local instance must be running
on the consensus ledger and one of the following conditions must be true:

    * The instance has been in the PRE_CLOSE state for more than
      LEDGER_MIN_CLOSE (2s) time AND if no transactions are seen the time since closed
      is greater than idle_time defined as max(15s, 2 * lastCloseResolution).

    * The instance detected that over 75% of peers (based on target proposers) moved
      to lcsINITIAL_POSITION or lcsESTABLISH already (peers that advertised a position).

Logic for these judgments is mostly in ContinuousLedgerTiming::shouldClose.

"close resolution" is a metric updated to round close time (range is
10-120s, values defined LedgerTimeResolution).


3.1.2 What happens when all conditions are met?

When moving to lcsINITIAL_POSITION, LedgerConsensusImp::closeLedger() is
called. There, the local instance sends a "neCLOSING_LEDGER" message that
contains which ledger it thinks of as "current".  This is also when the
initial position is computed as well as closing time.

3.2 lcsINITIAL_POSITION
This state is a holding state where proposers send out their initial position and
wait for the right condition to actually perform consensus on the set of initial
positions.

Two conditions must be met:
  * enough participants must be participating (at least mTargetProposers)
  * more than LEDGER_MIN_CONSENSUS_TIME must have elapsed in the lcsINITIAL_POSITION
     state. This gives time for all proposers to send out their proposal, not just the
     first mTargetProposers one.

3.3 lcsESTABLISH

This state is where peers decide on what the next ledger is going to be.
The next ledger can be thought of as (previous ledger, close time,
transaction set). Consensus must be reached for close time and transaction
set (previous ledger is not enforced to allow for forks).

LedgerConsensusImp::updateOurPosition() is the main method to internalize
the local instance position + disputes (via updateVote) / close time based
on messages it gets from the network.

3.3.1 Updating close time

The local instance will change its close time towards a larger majority
subset: it will snap to the largest group if possible. A group is
considered "valid" if it represents more than 30% of the peers, then
evolves to up to 51% if consensus is stuck (see AV_INIT_CONSENSUS_PCT).
To consider that consensus is met on the close time the percentage has to
be higher than AV_CT_CONSENSUS_PCT (75%) and the group has to be valid.

3.3.2 Declaring consensus

The evaluation if the peers reached consensus is performed in
LedgerConsensusImp::haveConsensus(), which deers part of its judgment
ContinuousLedgerTiming::haveConsensus().

Consensus is declared if all of the following conditions are met:

    * the number of proposers is above the consensus threshold

    * 80% of the proposers agree with the local instance.

!!!!!! Open: LEDGER_GRANULARITY being 1 second means that local instance
       will see things ~1 second late; this means only 2 updates in a 3s
       block, which is not a lot of updates to reach consensus. We probably
       need to move to a smaller value like 500ms or smaller.
!!!!!! Open: there is a chance that consensus could be called by the instance, yet
       the network, due to message propagation timing issues would change its vote.

3.3.3 What happens when consensus is declared?

When consensus is met, the state is set to lcsFINISHED, the information
about the last consensus is updated (number of participants, time, hash)
and "accept" is called asynchronously.


3.4 lcsFINISHED

Actual code is running in the background at that point.

LedgerConsensus::accept() applies the result of consensus to the local
instance.

It also creates a new open ledger and propagates transaction that should be included
in the next ledger.

At the end of accept() the state is set to lcsBUILT_LEDGER.

note: as this code runs in the background, the main timer may pick up on the
state change any time between 0 and LEDGER_GRANULARITY seconds.

3.5 lcsBUILT_LEDGER

Purpose of this state is to wait and advertise the newly built ledger.

The holding period is to avoid confusing nodes that could still be in
ESTABLISH phase about which ledger is the current ledger (and avoid triggering code
to download the latest validated ledger).

This state is a holding state that waits LEDGER_MIN_ADVERTISE_TIME (2 s) before
proceeding at which point it advertises to the network the newly built ledger
(including its validation if the node is a validator).
 
This is also where the close time offset is updated (bias compared to the network,
so that there is less contention for close time next time around).



The node then moves to the lcsACCEPTED state


3.6 lcsACCEPTED

Destroys consensus object.

Consensus object will be recreated when the timer triggers again
(LEDGER_GRANULARITY later) or on network event.


